README.md, before:

# 💡 $\varphi$-Code: An Agentic Python Competitive Programmer Fueled by (tiny) LLMs

> **$\varphi$-Code** (phi-code) is an open-source, agent-based system designed to tackle competitive programming problems. Inspired by projects like [AlphaCode](https://alphacode.deepmind.com/), $\varphi$-Code's core philosophy is **accessibility**: it aims to achieve strong performance using **small-to-medium (tiny) Language Models (LLMs)**, making powerful coding agents runnable even on a **consumer-level laptop or desktop PC**.

## 📰 News

The **$\varphi$-Code** agentic system achieved a significant milestone by successfully answering **all** questions for the latests LeetCode contests [Weekly Contest 476](https://leetcode.com/contest/weekly-contest-476/), and [Weekly Contest 477](https://leetcode.com/contest/weekly-contest-477/) (as of 11-24-2025) **correctly on the first attempt!**

This feat highlights the effectiveness of $\varphi$-Code's full pipeline, where the **Remote Solution Generation** produces candidate solutions, the **Intelligent Ranker Agent** selects the most promising one, and **Automated Testing** ensures the final submission is robust.

Using the underlying [gpt-oss-20B](https://huggingface.co/unsloth/gpt-oss-20b-GGUF) (Q4) model, $\varphi$-Code's successful execution achieved a final contest score of **18**, tying the Python score obtained by much larger models like [Gemini 2.5 Pro](https://gemini.google.com/), [GPT-5](https://chatgpt.com/), [DeepSeek v3.2](https://www.deepseek.com/), [Qwen 3](https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3), or [Grok 4](https://grok.com/), and surpassing many others like [Claude (Sonnet 4.5 | Opus 4.1)](https://claude.ai/), [GLM 4.6](https://chat.z.ai/), [Doubao 1.5 Pro](https://www.doubao.com/chat/), or [DeepSeek V3.2 (non-reasoning)](https://www.deepseek.com/)) in the competition.

You can check the outputs generated by $\varphi$-Code [here](https://github.com/Nan-Do/phi-code/tree/main/contests_results/leetcode_weekly_476/gpt_oss_20B) and view the official LeetCode contest rankings for the LLMs [here](https://leetcode.com/contest/weekly-contest-476/ranking/?region=llm).

### Web Interface

![WebBased Screenshot](webui.png)

### Curses Interface

![Curses Screenshot](curses_ui.png)

### Terminal Mode

![Terminal Screenshot](terminal_mode.png)
---

## 💻 Designed for Consumer Hardware

$\varphi$-Code is built around the principle of resource efficiency.

* **Tiny LLM Focus:** The system leverages compact models like [**Gemma 3-4B**](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-3-4b-it) for solution generation, which are manageable on standard consumer GPUs or even modern CPUs via quantization.
* **LLaMA Server Integration:** By using the **[`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) LLaMA server**, $\varphi$-Code can efficiently offload the computationally intensive LLM inference to the best available local hardware with optimized performance.
* **Efficient Ranker:** The ranking component, built on the **[`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/)** library, uses highly efficient embedding models that require minimal resources compared to the generative LLMs.

---

## ✨ Features

* **Accessible & Open-Source:** Built with a focus on running powerful agents using less computational resources.
* **Web-Based Interface:** A user-friendly Gradio web application for submitting problem statements and viewing generated solutions.
* **Curses-Based Interface:** A user-friendly curses interface for generating and viewing solutions from the terminal with vim-mode support.
* **Terminal Mode:** Run the tool as a shell command.
* **Remote Solution Generation:** Connects to a remote LLM API (like a [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) server) to generate multiple candidate Python solutions.
* **Intelligent Ranking (Ranker Agent):** Utilizes an embedding model from the **[`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/)** ecosystem to evaluate the feasibility of generated solutions (samples) against the problem statement (anchor).
* **Automated Testing:** Parses example tests from the problem statement, runs the candidate solutions, and sorts them by tests passed and the ranker's confidence score.

---

## 📂 Project Structure

```
.
├── contests_results/                     # Results of phi-code for different contests.
├── datasets/                             # Competitive programming datasets for ranker training.
│   ├── atcoder.jsonl
│   ├── codechef.jsonl
│   └── ...
├── LICENSE
├── ranker/                               # Code for training and managing the sentence-transformers ranker.
│   ├── check_datasets.py
│   ├── filter_datasets.py
│   └── train.py                          # Main ranker training script.
└── solver/                               # Solver coding agent.
    ├── general_prompt.txt
    ├── leetcode_prompt.txt
    ├── leetcode.py                       # LeetCode module.
    ├── utils.py
    ├── main.py                           # The main module.
    ├── web_ui.py                         # Web Interface.
    ├── curses_ui.py                      # Curses Interface.
    ├── terminal.py                       # Run the tool as a shell command.
    └── requirements.txt
```

---

## 🚀 Getting Started

This project is structured into two main components: the **`solver`** for running the coding agent and the **`ranker`** for training the model that sorts the solutions.

### 1. Running the Web UI

The core agent functionality is available through the `solver/main.py` Gradio application.

#### Prerequisites

* A Python environment.
* A running **LLaMA server** (e.g., using [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp)'s `llama-server` tool) hosting an LLM.
  * **Recommended Model:** [**gpt-oss-20B**](https://huggingface.co/openai/gpt-oss-20b) or similar code-centric, compact model.
  * **Recommended Settings:** Temperature of **0.95** and Top-K of **300**.

#### Installation and Execution

1. Navigate to the `solver` directory.
2. Install dependencies:

    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

3. Run the main application, providing the necessary server details:

    ```bash
    python solver/main.py \
      --server <YOUR_SERVER_ADDRESS> \
      --port <YOUR_SERVER_PORT> \
      --site leetcode
    ```

    > **Note:** The current version is primarily focused on **LeetCode** problems, utilizing `leetcode_prompt.txt`. This is expected to improve in future updates. Problem statements from other sites won't work.

#### `main.py` Command Line Options

| Option | Description | Example |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `-r`, `--ranker` | Path or HuggingFace link to the ranker model (a [`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/) model). | `Salesforce/SFR-Embedding-Code-2B_R` |
| `-s`, `--server` | Address of the [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) server hosting the LLM. | `http://127.0.0.1` |
| `-p`, `--port` | Port of the [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) server. | `8080` |
| `-m`, `--site` | From which site are the problem statements | `leetcode` |
| `-i`, `--interface` | Which interface to use (terminal, web, curses) | `web` |
| `-f`, `--statement` | Text file with the problem statement to use| `statement.txt` |
| `-n`, `--number` | Number of solutions to generate | `10` |
| `-o`, `--output_file` | File to store the generated solutions in jsonl format | `solutions.jsonl` |

---

## 🧠 Training the Ranker Agent with `sentence-transformers`

The ranker is a crucial component that scores candidate solutions. It is trained as an embedding model to determine how relevant a generated solution is to a given problem statement.

> **⚠️ Work in Progress:** Training a state-of-the-art ranker still requires significant resources. The current `solver` uses a pre-trained model, but the tools below are provided for those who wish, and have the means, to train their own.

### The `ranker` Folder

The `ranker` folder contains the code for fine-tuning the ranker model using the **[`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/)** library, typically leveraging a Siamese-network architecture for contrastive learning (e.g., Multiple Negative Ranking Loss or Triplet Loss).

* `train.py`: The main script for fine-tuning a ranker model.
* `check_datasets.py`, `filter_datasets.py`, `sample_dataset.py`: Utilities for preparing and managing the training data in `datasets/`.

### Training the Ranker

The `train.py` script allows you to fine-tune an embedding model on competitive programming datasets.

```bash
python ranker/train.py \
  --model coldchair16/CPRetriever-Code \
  --epochs 2 \
  --batch-size 8 \
  --leetcode datasets/leetcode.jsonl \
  --codeforces datasets/codeforces.jsonl \
  --output-dir my_trained_ranker
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

$\varphi$-Code is an open-source effort. We welcome contributions to:

* Expand the datasets for ranker training.
* Improve the prompt templates (e.g., creating one for Codeforces).
* Enhance the problem parsing to extract tests more reliably.

Feel free to open an issue or submit a pull request!

Commit message:

Updated the README.md to show that the tool supports Atcoder

README.md, after:

# 💡 $\varphi$-Code: An Agentic Python Competitive Programmer Fueled by (tiny) LLMs

> **$\varphi$-Code** (phi-code) is an open-source, agent-based system designed to tackle competitive programming problems. Inspired by projects like [AlphaCode](https://alphacode.deepmind.com/), $\varphi$-Code's core philosophy is **accessibility**: it aims to achieve strong performance using **small-to-medium (tiny) Language Models (LLMs)**, making powerful coding agents runnable even on a **consumer-level laptop or desktop PC**.

## 📰 News

The **$\varphi$-Code** agentic system achieved a significant milestone by successfully answering **all** questions for the latests LeetCode contests [Weekly Contest 476](https://leetcode.com/contest/weekly-contest-476/), and [Weekly Contest 477](https://leetcode.com/contest/weekly-contest-477/) (as of 11-24-2025) **correctly on the first attempt!**

This feat highlights the effectiveness of $\varphi$-Code's full pipeline, where the **Remote Solution Generation** produces candidate solutions, the **Intelligent Ranker Agent** selects the most promising one, and **Automated Testing** ensures the final submission is robust.

Using the underlying [gpt-oss-20B](https://huggingface.co/unsloth/gpt-oss-20b-GGUF) (Q4) model, $\varphi$-Code's successful execution achieved a final contest score of **18**, tying the Python score obtained by much larger models like [Gemini 2.5 Pro](https://gemini.google.com/), [GPT-5](https://chatgpt.com/), [DeepSeek v3.2](https://www.deepseek.com/), [Qwen 3](https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3), or [Grok 4](https://grok.com/), and surpassing many others like [Claude (Sonnet 4.5 | Opus 4.1)](https://claude.ai/), [GLM 4.6](https://chat.z.ai/), [Doubao 1.5 Pro](https://www.doubao.com/chat/), or [DeepSeek V3.2 (non-reasoning)](https://www.deepseek.com/)) in the competition.

You can check the outputs generated by $\varphi$-Code [here](https://github.com/Nan-Do/phi-code/tree/main/contests_results/leetcode_weekly_476/gpt_oss_20B) and view the official LeetCode contest rankings for the LLMs [here](https://leetcode.com/contest/weekly-contest-476/ranking/?region=llm).

### Web Interface

![WebBased Screenshot](webui.png)

### Curses Interface

![Curses Screenshot](curses_ui.png)

### Terminal Mode

![Terminal Screenshot](terminal_mode.png)
---

## 💻 Designed for Consumer Hardware

$\varphi$-Code is built around the principle of resource efficiency.

* **Tiny LLM Focus:** The system leverages compact models like [**Gemma 3-4B**](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-3-4b-it) for solution generation, which are manageable on standard consumer GPUs or even modern CPUs via quantization.
* **LLaMA Server Integration:** By using the **[`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) LLaMA server**, $\varphi$-Code can efficiently offload the computationally intensive LLM inference to the best available local hardware with optimized performance.
* **Efficient Ranker:** The ranking component, built on the **[`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/)** library, uses highly efficient embedding models that require minimal resources compared to the generative LLMs.

---

## ✨ Features

* **Accessible & Open-Source:** Built with a focus on running powerful agents using less computational resources.
* **Web-Based Interface:** A user-friendly Gradio web application for submitting problem statements and viewing generated solutions.
* **Curses-Based Interface:** A user-friendly curses interface for generating and viewing solutions from the terminal with vim-mode support.
* **Terminal Mode:** Run the tool as a shell command.
* **Remote Solution Generation:** Connects to a remote LLM API (like a [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) server) to generate multiple candidate Python solutions.
* **Intelligent Ranking (Ranker Agent):** Utilizes an embedding model from the **[`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/)** ecosystem to evaluate the feasibility of generated solutions (samples) against the problem statement (anchor).
* **Automated Testing:** Parses example tests from the problem statement, runs the candidate solutions, and sorts them by tests passed and the ranker's confidence score.

---

## 📂 Project Structure

```
.
├── contests_results/                     # Results of phi-code for different contests.
├── datasets/                             # Competitive programming datasets for ranker training.
│   ├── atcoder.jsonl
│   ├── codechef.jsonl
│   └── ...
├── LICENSE
├── ranker/                               # Code for training and managing the sentence-transformers ranker.
│   ├── check_datasets.py
│   ├── filter_datasets.py
│   └── train.py                          # Main ranker training script.
└── solver/                               # Solver coding agent.
    ├── atcoder.py                        # Atcoder module.
    ├── general_prompt.txt
    ├── leetcode_prompt.txt
    ├── leetcode.py                       # LeetCode module.
    ├── utils.py
    ├── main.py                           # The main module.
    ├── web_ui.py                         # Web Interface.
    ├── curses_ui.py                      # Curses Interface.
    ├── terminal.py                       # Run the tool as a shell command.
    └── requirements.txt
```

---

## 🚀 Getting Started

This project is structured into two main components: the **`solver`** for running the coding agent and the **`ranker`** for training the model that sorts the solutions.

### 1. Running the Web UI

The core agent functionality is available through the `solver/main.py` Gradio application.

#### Prerequisites

* A Python environment.
* A running **LLaMA server** (e.g., using [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp)'s `llama-server` tool) hosting an LLM.
  * **Recommended Model:** [**gpt-oss-20B**](https://huggingface.co/openai/gpt-oss-20b) or similar code-centric, compact model.
  * **Recommended Settings:** Temperature of **0.95** and Top-K of **300**.

#### Installation and Execution

1. Navigate to the `solver` directory.
2. Install dependencies:

    ```bash
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

3. Run the main application, providing the necessary server details:

    ```bash
    python solver/main.py \
      --server <YOUR_SERVER_ADDRESS> \
      --port <YOUR_SERVER_PORT> \
      --site leetcode
    ```

    > **Note:** The current version is primarily focused on **LeetCode** problems, utilizing `leetcode_prompt.txt`. This is expected to improve in future updates. Problem statements from other sites won't work.

#### `main.py` Command Line Options

| Option | Description | Example |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `-r`, `--ranker` | Path or HuggingFace link to the ranker model (a [`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/) model). | `Salesforce/SFR-Embedding-Code-2B_R` |
| `-s`, `--server` | Address of the [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) server hosting the LLM. | `http://127.0.0.1` |
| `-p`, `--port` | Port of the [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) server. | `8080` |
| `-m`, `--site` | From which site are the problem statements (leetcode, atcoder)| `leetcode` |
| `-i`, `--interface` | Which interface to use (terminal, web, curses) | `web` |
| `-f`, `--statement` | Text file with the problem statement to use| `statement.txt` |
| `-n`, `--number` | Number of solutions to generate | `10` |
| `-o`, `--output_file` | File to store the generated solutions in jsonl format | `solutions.jsonl` |

---

## 🧠 Training the Ranker Agent with `sentence-transformers`

The ranker is a crucial component that scores candidate solutions. It is trained as an embedding model to determine how relevant a generated solution is to a given problem statement.

> **⚠️ Work in Progress:** Training a state-of-the-art ranker still requires significant resources. The current `solver` uses a pre-trained model, but the tools below are provided for those who wish, and have the means, to train their own.

### The `ranker` Folder

The `ranker` folder contains the code for fine-tuning the ranker model using the **[`sentence-transformers`](https://sbert.net/)** library, typically leveraging a Siamese-network architecture for contrastive learning (e.g., Multiple Negative Ranking Loss or Triplet Loss).

* `train.py`: The main script for fine-tuning a ranker model.
* `check_datasets.py`, `filter_datasets.py`, `sample_dataset.py`: Utilities for preparing and managing the training data in `datasets/`.

### Training the Ranker

The `train.py` script allows you to fine-tune an embedding model on competitive programming datasets.

```bash
python ranker/train.py \
  --model coldchair16/CPRetriever-Code \
  --epochs 2 \
  --batch-size 8 \
  --leetcode datasets/leetcode.jsonl \
  --codeforces datasets/codeforces.jsonl \
  --output-dir my_trained_ranker
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

$\varphi$-Code is an open-source effort. We welcome contributions to:

* Expand the datasets for ranker training.
* Improve the prompt templates (e.g., creating one for Codeforces).
* Enhance the problem parsing to extract tests more reliably.

Feel free to open an issue or submit a pull request!
